foreign
all self-interest it seems leads if you
allow it to it leads to
a more refined understanding of what
makes us happy
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease I'm Brett Kistler
here today with my co-host Joe Hudson
[Music]
so a lot of the work that we do in these
courses has been around finding our
wants finding our needs and our wants
and asking for what we want and getting
what we want and just really living into
our own self-interest and loving it and
trusting it is good and a lot of this
seems to conflict with a lot of a
programming that we've gotten from
parenting or from society around
selfishness and not being selfish and
being selfless and I'm curious to dive
into in this episode the line if there
is a line between healthy self-interest
and what we call selfishness
how do you define selfishness I have a
probably a pretty uh ludicrous
definition of it but it's what your
parents told you you were when they
wanted you to do something else
I think that's really what selfishness
is every time I've watched a parent call
somebody selfish and and then you know
they become adults and then they think
they're selfish it's always because the
parent wants them to do something else
and so or they're not doing what they
want right so it's almost a projection
of selfishness from the parent
to even call your kids selfish is is a
selfish act you know and if you're
defining it the same way because
a kid's whole job is to learn how to
assert their will and to get their wants
and needs met and of course like there's
no two-year-old who's like let me think
about world peace the two-year-old's
like cookie I want it you know that's
that's the job of a two-year-old
so it seems to be that that's what
selfishness is it's it's the things that
your parents wanted you to do for them
that you didn't do
that's that's my definition of it in the
more ludicrous sense in the another way
to look at it or like maybe a more all
self-interest it seems leads if you
allow it to it leads to
a more refined understanding of what
makes us happy
so if you allow yourself to explore
your wants and your desires without a
whole bunch of guilt without a whole
bunch of like oh I made a mistake just
simply like oh I explored that desire
and that didn't actually feel as good as
other ways of interacting than what it
actually leads you to is like a deep
level of altruism which also has its own
selfishness in it meaning that altruism
feels good there's a great feeling
physical and
helping other people
there's a great emotional mental feeling
of being selfless so I don't really see
a difference I see it more as an
evolution and the more that we allow
ourselves to follow our wants the more
we become
selfless in the standard way of looking
at it
but it's just really refining how to be
really good at being selfish
yeah I'm thinking about this idea of
becoming really good at being selfish
and a thing that comes to mind is just
some ways that people are really
successful at getting what they want but
often at the expense of other people not
and so like in the parenting example I
can imagine a parent who calls their
child selfish
as a way to teach them how to operate in
a group like this is something that
Society labels the selfish if you are
going to eat all of the cookies you're
not going to have any friends
and also it might just be a way to help
somebody let's say there's a child
there's multiple children playing
together and one of them is five years
older than the other one and it's just
way more capable
in terms of their nervous system and
their size and their sophistication at
getting what they want yes even subtly
manipulating the younger one so it could
also be used I could imagine by a parent
to try to find Harmony in a with an
increased awareness of what's going on
with the kids
trying to find Harmony in a group and so
yeah you're pointing out something
really beautiful and I think it's kind
of the same thing that the Buddhists in
some way are pointing out where they say
you know like craving and aversion where
that's like all the root of all pain is
desire
yet you know a Buddhist monk gets up and
walks there must be some desire there or
eats there must be some desire there or
meditates there must be some desire
there so what's the distinction the
question is what's the distinction that
we're making and
what we want to be able to do is have
some more realistic response to that
which is you know don't eat all the
cookies in any situation don't eat all
the cookies but we can all construct
some idea where the the best thing to do
for the group is to eat all the cookies
or
the best thing for the group is actually
deep self-interest because if you can't
take care of yourself then you know how
does the whole or how did your community
take care of itself so it's this it's
this constant thing and and that's I
think the evolutionary Journey that
we're talking about so
if we allow ourselves to constantly find
out what our deepest want is and explore
that deepest want
then it leads us to a deeper and deeper
altruism it leads us to deeper and
deeper care of other people it leads us
to greater and greater compassion
so I'm saying that the mechanism to
teach compassion
and empathy and
altruism is to
support somebody's wants to allow them
to explore them and Define the faults in
them so that they can find the deeper
want
instead of the shallow want that feels
like crap right the heroin addict wants
to do heroin but it feels like crap
you know you might want to Gorge
yourself on cookies but it feels like
crap
and and then the deepest level what is
what actually is is it does it feel
better in the moment to eat all the
cookies or does it feel better in the
moment to share
but if you're doing it out of a
moralistic sense if you're doing it
because you try not to be selfish then
it's worthless and you don't actually
get the benefit of it you know and you
don't learn to do it because of the pure
love of doing it you're doing it out of
just a form of self-preservation so it's
just a horrible way to teach it that's
what I'm pointing to this is pointing to
something that comes up in a lot of the
group dynamics in the courses where if
you are if you have some desire from
your self-interest and then
from this moralistic standpoint you're
withholding that desire that it actually
builds some form of resentment towards
others
and another thing that can happen then
is in in groups imagine you know there's
a plate of cookies and so frequently in
groups the last cookie will just go
uneaten because everybody will not allow
themselves to have the want for the last
cookie and assume that the cookie is for
everyone else therefore the cookie goes
uneaten and this kind of thing is a
metaphor for something that happens so
frequently in groups and in leadership
and in companies where everybody's
thinking something
that they want the group to have some
wisdom that they want to bring in and
they're afraid it'll hurt feelings or
just be seen as selfish even if it's
just their own want
like I want this meeting to end I'm
bored that might be something that
everybody is about to say but nobody
wants to be you know Rocking the Boat or
offending exactly I mean that exact
example has happened with me so many
times where when people start to realize
that their wants are the companies wants
that their needs are the company needs
like the needs of the individual parts
of the organism is the need of the
organism that exactly happens and and
you'll see it you'll see somebody go wow
okay this meeting's boring I really want
to be more interested in this meeting
and all of a sudden like 10 people smile
they're like yeah and then all of a
sudden the meeting can shift into
something else but that would be a
selfish thing to say right so so people
don't say it that would be rude so
people don't say it that would be
self-interested so that people won't say
it but it's actually the thing that
everybody wants to hear or at least a
good portion of people want to hear
and that is the example in everything
oftentimes when you're this like there's
a marriage and they're in trouble it's
just they stop telling each other what
they actually want right they're just
constantly trying to accommodate each
other and so their wants aren't being
met and the other thing about that that
you pointed to subtly is that whatever
the want is that you have if you
sublimate it it comes out in different
ways
so what you start seeing is where
there's a whole bunch of wants that have
been subjugated in in a organization it
becomes very political and gossipy and
gossipy one of the things you see that
creates that political culture is that
people don't know how to succeed
they don't know what it is that means
they've succeeded so they they think the
only way to move up through the ranks is
to please the people above them but the
other way that it happens is that people
aren't clear about what they want
and it's like it's seen as selfish or
ingredient so it becomes a lot more
political especially at the leadership
level
like if the leaders can't be clear about
what they want then it wow it gets
really funky really quick inside of an
organization
an example here would be if there is a
leader of an organization who is
owning what they want but their wants
are coming from a place of fear and what
they really just want is for everybody
to do what they say because they're
afraid of how things are going to go and
they're afraid of trusting other
people's intuition and other people
making decisions
then from that position of power they
can they can want everybody to listen to
them and not recognize maybe that they
have a deeper want which is
you know I think all of our deeper want
is to be in a group where everybody's
getting their needs met and getting what
they want but we don't see that when
we're in fear so when when we have a
group where there's a a power imbalance
or a hierarchy
how would you approach this as either
the person in the position of power or a
person not in a position of power
with regards to getting needs met
without having this concept of
selfishness
as a form of control yeah that's a great
great real life example so it have
actually happens in two ways so let's
take the one you explained somebody
who's out of fear and what they actually
want on some level that they probably
can't even recognize is they just want
everyone to do what they say
first of all if they can recognize it
and they can say it everybody's going to
feel more calm like hey this is an
organization where I just want people to
do what what I tell them to do if you're
down for that stay and if you're not go
but that's what I want I want to be that
kind of there are definitely CEOs who
run their companies that way there's
definitely people who want to be in
companies like that wow it's efficient
one God tells me what to do boom I know
how to succeed boom I just was talking
to somebody on the plane the other day
who said exactly that I love working for
this person because it's just like
everything's efficient they just tell
you what to do
so that that's one thing but if they
can't say it or they can't own it in
themselves it'll get really weird and
wonky inside the organization the other
side of that is you have say somebody a
CEO who wants everybody that he wants
like collaborative right or she wants
collaborative so they're completely not
owning the things that they want to just
say do it this way
so and so that creates a whole bunch of
weirdness too so let's say 80 they want
collaboration but 20 they just want it
done their way
but they won't say I just want it done
this way on this one for me
and they're always trying to be
collaborative that creates a tremendous
amount of
guck in the system too all sorts of
politics and and I'll actually do
work with CEOs in with their team and
I'll say okay just tell them exactly
what you want in the word like in a
complete way
and then do it in a not way and
then do it like when you're hedging you
don't want to tell them but you're
telling them and you just see the CEO
recognize at that moment how much of a
relief it is to their people when he's
just telling them what to do or she's
just on what to do or when she's being
clear
that this is one of those places where
we collaborate and I don't want to tell
you what to do that Clarity of want is
so useful for the people
um who are working with you and they can
say no hopefully you can trust your
leadership team to say yeah no I don't
want to do it that way I hear you want
me to do it but and so when all the
people are owning their wants it's super
functional that self-interest is what
drives really good
uh collaboration if everybody's got
their roles and they have self-interest
in their roles and the roles are well
defined and they're the right roles then
then that's what makes a great company
happen yeah so something that brings up
is if like let's say it's a company or
let's say it's a community and I step
into a group of people and let's say
that group has a stable Dynamic where
people are actually anticipating each
other's needs and they're doing this
fairly well maybe they're not owning
their needs fully and then I step into
the group and I'm just like I know what
I want I know how to say it I know how
to ask for it and I trust people to ask
for what they want and it just turns out
that I'm projecting that everyone else
in the group is as comfortable with
their wants as I am and it takes some
time for me to realize that actually
people are starting to give up what they
want they're hiding their wants they're
giving me more than they actually want
to give and then that's building
resentment
and I can imagine it goes the other way
too if I don't feel comfortable in my
own wants I might just project that if I
were to assert my wants
everybody else would give in when they
don't want to and that wouldn't be what
I want
there seems to be some space in here for
our own projections to
kind of lead our behavior and also be
incorrect in all those ways I've seen it
happen so somebody thinks that
everybody should handle directness and
either people give in or people think
you're an for asking directly
for what you want or or oppositely some
people think that they'd be an
for asking directly and people get
really pissed at them for being
uncertain or for not being direct or
straightforward or being political so
yeah you see it in every way and
there's just signs that are really good
if someone feels resentful it means that
they're not going they're not following
what they want they're not holding their
boundaries they're not saying the things
that they want they're not getting their
needs met
so resentfulness is a really good way to
find that indicator the indicator of one
of the sides of it right
where people are giving in and then the
other side of it is you'll get dismissed
right if you're starting to really ask
for you want and people get resentful
you'll see their anger or dismissal from
them and that's another good indicator
but what you're basically asking in some
level is
something to the effect of hey if this
if there's an organism that's operating
healthy in a healthy way and they get
into a whole bunch of other organisms
that are operating in an unhealthy way
there's going to be some friction and
I'm going to say yes there's going to be
some friction but it doesn't change the
fact that everybody being clear about
their wants is the healthy way for an
organization
to exist particularly if they're owning
their wants and they're also constantly
refining their wants that's part of the
evolution if you're not refining your
wants then the evolution isn't going to
have so maybe the first thing you say is
you're like what I want is I want this
lover who has like the perfect body and
so that's the thing you think you want
maybe television has taught you that you
go off and you follow that want and you
might find out oh wow it's the perfect
body is not all that that's like really
cool for the first couple times of being
of lovemaking but after that I actually
just want somebody's really essential in
their body I really want someone who can
who can accept pleasure and to and who
loves pleasure
and then that might become the new thing
that you want and then you follow that
road down until wow actually I need real
love connection for for my love life to
be great
and so you're refining your wants
through that session you're through
those things you're refining your wants
and for us to jump away from a want like
the body to a want like loving
connection then you're just constantly
going to still be wanting the body and
you and you're never going to be able to
fully dive into just the connection
so it's really important to just move
through the wants and to
it's just like you watch a little kid
all the time you see these kids and
they're saying you know they don't say
anything but they want to walk they want
to talk these wants Drive their
evolution
and it's the same thing all the way
through life and it's not our Evolution
slows because we start questioning our
wants because we start feeling guilty
about our wants because we're selfish in
our wants
or we stop refining them we're like okay
yeah we're just going after money money
money money money money money and until
all of a sudden we're like 60 years old
and we're like holy crap but this
doesn't make me happy
well I guess I want something else yeah
the thing that I see you speaking to
here is that there's this there's this
stair stepping down deeper and deeper
into our wants and the process you just
described is actually it's not trivial
that's that's some major life changes to
be
hey I'm gonna try dating a partner who
is I'm going to search and find the
person with the hottest body and then go
through the period of a relationship
with them that I discovered that I
actually want something else which then
involves
being honest and vulnerable moving on or
just being messy and avoiding whatever
that is and then moving into the next
deeper want so this this process you're
describing is
is a transformational process that is
scary especially if you're bringing it
into a community or a family or a
company that you feel very attached to
and so I'm curious
how to facilitate internally this
process if somebody's listening to this
episode and they're like okay I want to
move into my wants more deeply
what's the way to approach this that
facilitates this personal transformation
in the least damaging way in the groups
that we're in
and I'm imagining an example being like
approaching my company and saying hey so
I realized that for years I haven't been
asking for what I want and I've been
really trying to get the you know the
group intelligence to bring up what it
wants and my wants haven't actually been
present so I'm going to experiment with
bringing my wants into this more and
also I really want to be able to trust
people to say no that sounds like a
pretty cool way to do it I mean also on
top of that you could say things like
Hey how do you want to be how do you
want to hear my wants how important are
my wants to hear for you so you can
actually get the feedback they're like
yeah oh we've been waiting for you
please tell us what you want like and
you can ask them how they want to
receive it how they want you to deliver
it like all that stuff is all flexible
and and can be something that
that agreement makes the whole thing
easier the conscious so the principle
there is that you bring it forward in a
conscious way in a meta context first
so that people know what's coming know
how it's coming
and you're listening to them in the
process of it and making sure that
you're finding a way that works for you
and for them that's the trick yeah it
seems that another component is just
being prepared for major changes
if you're going through this process
your wants are going to change
significantly and that that might mean
owning it as that occurs and
people being disappointed with you
people's wants other people's wants
around you might change yeah so the
weird thing is if you ask 20 people they
how many of you would want to be with
somebody who's doing it because they
feel obligated to be with you like 19
out of 20 maybe 20 out of 20 is going to
know I don't want it
so it's it's actually really interesting
if you say to somebody like I'm doing
this out of obligation and that's not
fair to you and it's not fair to me
and this is what I actually want
there's usually a tremendous amount of
understanding there there's a lot of
fear to say it you know people are very
scared to say what they want
and it's because they were we were all
told as When We Were Young that our
wants were bad
that we were bad to have certain wants
and we had when we had certain wants our
the love was removed I just want your
attention mom you're needy you know
you're you're clingy whatever
like we were taught that that would like
to own a want is an incredibly
vulnerable thing and we got rejected a
lot for our wants and so we just start
shutting them down
but there are evolutionary pull it's
like the way that a tree bends to the
light our wants are that same kind of
mechanism
they teach us the next step in our
learning process not the ultimate best
step but the next step in our learning
process
and if it becomes like a craving if it
becomes what I would say the Buddhists
describe as desire where it's like
you're like a Hungry Ghost it's a pretty
good indicator that it's not no longer a
healthy want it's not a pretty it's an
absolute indicator that it's that we're
not in a healthy want there anymore
that you're in an addictive or an
obsessive want and that there's a want
there's a deeper want that will satisfy
you I guess there's a my final question
for this episode how can we relate to
somebody in Our Lives who we have been
relating to as selfish and relate to
them in a different way recognizing that
that they are they're exploring what
they want and then helping helping
facilitate or support them and exploring
what they want even if what they
currently want might be a short-sighted
Hungry Ghost kind of uh Behavior while
having our own boundaries I would say
helping them facilitate only if they
want that right but the best thing is to
do it on in yourself and if you do it in
yourself it becomes so clear with
everybody else and there's this cool
little exercise you can do that'll
really really make this whole thing go
away from just like
intellectualizing like somebody right
now is listening to this thing and
they're like well actually Walter this
and utilitarian you know
philosophy says blah blah blah all great
stuff don't get me wrong but if you want
to just make it real just write down the
want that you have that you don't want
to admit to yourself
right that your most you feel most
guilty of right some sexual thing or
some money thing usually will you know
be the right thing there but whatever it
is some Fame thing something you have
guilt about and then just ask yourself
what's the need behind that want
and whatever you come up with just ask
yourself again what's the need behind
that want and whatever you come up with
then just ask again what the need behind
that one is
you just keep on going down and you will
find that every single one of your wants
is based on
something essential that humans need to
thrive the wants are just strategies
right the wants are just a strategy and
we're going and learning our strategies
to get to the place where we're where we
can be happy and healthy and Thrive and
when you see that inside of yourself
all of a sudden it's really clear with
everybody else
and then it's it's just you can not
judge them for their their wants which
is the biggest issue anybody who's doing
those
short-term wants that that don't feel
good that are self-destructive they they
feel guilty about them on some level
and so you can be with them in that
without the judgment and the Judgment
keeps that guilt in place right so you
can be without the judgment and you can
say well what's actually going on here
and be with them in that and that's the
trick with yourself or with others is to
really
instead of saying this want is bad it's
really saying like what is this want
really want how do I really satisfy it
what's going to make that a hundred
percent for me and then it's starting to
explore an experiment that's beautiful
yeah thank you Joe yeah thanks it's been
a great talk all right talk to you soon
all right and here are some integration
questions for this episode
how do you limit Yourself by calling
yourself selfish
how do you view others as selfish when
they're taking care of themselves
what actions do you take when you are
scared you won't be able to take care of
yourself
[Music]
all right everyone thanks for listening